                    Yet Another Backup Utility
                    ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

What does it do?

It helps to create backups, in particular backups of only the files that
have changed since the last time you backed up.

It was designed for backing up files to large discs such as CDR, hard
discs, zip discs, etc. It won't be much use for floppy discs.

This program comes with no warranty; you use it at your own risk. Having
said that, I trust it enough to use it for my backups.
It is supplied under the GNU general public licence, see the file
Licence for more details.

Why did I write this program?

I had a CD writer, and I used it to backup my data, but it took quite a
long time to back everything up, and most of it never changed anyway. So
I didn't back up as often as I should have done.
When I accidentally wiped my hard disc, I got rather annoyed. Therefore
I decided to write this program so I would backup more frequently.

How does it work?

It copies files from the source directory to the destination
directory, and creates a list of all the files it has copied, including their size
and date stamps.
The next time you want to backup, do the same, but let it have the list
that was generated the first time. It will then only copy files that
aren't on the list, or that have been updated since the list was made.

Isn't this what the Newer option on the filer does?

Yes. However the newer option won't work if the destination is read only
such as a CDR, or if the backups are split over several discs.


How do I use it?

Double click on the !YABU icon in the filer window. An icon should
appear on the iconbar. Click select on this icon, and a window will
open.

To backup for the first time:

Drag the directory containing the files you want to backup to the source
directory field.
Drag the directory that will contain the backed up files to the destination
directory field.
Drag any directories and files that are in the source directory, but you
don't want backed up, to the exclude field.

Drag the icon next to the new files list to a directory somewhere where
you want to save the list of files. Inside the destination directory is
a good place.

Click on the Backup icon.

A status window will then open, showing the directory currently being
copied, and the number of files copied so far.

When it has finished, click on the close icon.

The destination directory can then be written to CD or whatever, then
deleted.

To backup subsequently:

Set up as for the first time, but drag the files list that was created
from the previous backup to the existing files list field.

Click on the Backup icon.

The status window will open, but this time only files that have changed
or are new since the last backup will be copied.


The files checked field in the status display shows how many files in
the source directory have been check to see if they need copying.
The files copied field in the status display show how many of the files
check have actually been copied.

Files are copied using the Filer Action module (which is the same as is
used when you copy files in the desktop).

There are two options:
Treat image files as directories
If ticked then image files (such as PC partitions, archives if ArcFS or
SparkFS are loaded, etc.) will be treated as directories rather than
files. I recommend you leave this unticked.
Faster
This has the same effect as faster does when normally copying files in
the desktop; it makes the copying faster, but leaves the desktop
slightly less responsive whilst copying. This option will probably only
have any effect on RISC OS 4.


Making a list of already backed up files:
If you have already backed up some files, and want to make a list of
those files so that you don't have to back them up again if they haven't
changed, then drag the directory containing the files to the source
directory field, leave the destination directory field blank, and fill in
the new files list field. Then click on the Backup icon.
This will only work if the filenames are unchanged on the backup medium.
For example if you backup to CDR, and all the filenames get translated
to upper case then it will not work as the files will be considered
different. If you write Joliet format CDs and use CDROMFS then this will
not be a problem.


What happens when everything goes pear shaped and I need to restore
my backed up files?

This has to be done manually. Copy all files from the first backup to
wherever you want. Then copy the subsequent backups on top of the first,
in the same order as the backups were made.



Problems

There are no known bugs at present.
If you rename a directory, then all the file within it are deemed to
have changed.
The exclude field only has room for about four or five entries.
 
Suggestions for improvements are welcome.
If you find a bug, please let me know, or better still fix it yourself
and send me a patch.

Any updates will be available from
http://www.ecs.soton.ac.uk/~ajw498/utilities/

Alex Waugh
ajw498@ecs.soton.ac.uk

